.. _gnu-free-documentation-license:

Appendix G. GNU Free Documentation License
===========================================

Version 1.1, March 2000
   
   
    Copyright (C) 2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc. 59 Temple Place, Suite
    330, Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute
    verbatim copies of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.

G.0. Preamble
--------------



The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other written
document "free" in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone the effective
freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or without modifying it, either
commercially or noncommercially. Secondarily, this License preserves for the
author and publisher a way to get credit for their work, while not being
considered responsible for modifications made by others.

This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative works of the
document must themselves be free in the same sense. It complements the GNU
General Public License, which is a copyleft license designed for free software.

We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free software,
because free software needs free documentation: a free program should come with
manuals providing the same freedoms that the software does. But this License is
not limited to software manuals; it can be used for any textual work,
regardless of subject matter or whether it is published as a printed book. We
recommend this License principally for works whose purpose is instruction or
reference.

G.1. Applicability and definitions
-----------------------------------



This License applies to any manual or other work that contains a notice placed
by the copyright holder saying it can be distributed under the terms of this
License. The "Document", below, refers to any such manual or work. Any member
of the public is a licensee, and is addressed as "you".

A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the Document or
a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with modifications and/or
translated into another language.

A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter section of the
Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the publishers or
authors of the Document to the Document's overall subject (or to related
matters) and contains nothing that could fall directly within that overall
subject. (For example, if the Document is in part a textbook of mathematics, a
Secondary Section may not explain any mathematics.) The relationship could be a
matter of historical connection with the subject or with related matters, or of
legal, commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position regarding them.

The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose titles are
designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice that says that
the Document is released under this License.

The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are listed, as
Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that the
Document is released under this License.

A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy, represented
in a format whose specification is available to the general public, whose
contents can be viewed and edited directly and straightforwardly with generic
text editors or (for images composed of pixels) generic paint programs or (for
drawings) some widely available drawing editor, and that is suitable for input
to text formatters or for automatic translation to a variety of formats
suitable for input to text formatters. A copy made in an otherwise Transparent
file format whose markup has been designed to thwart or discourage subsequent
modification by readers is not Transparent. A copy that is not "Transparent" is
called "Opaque".

Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain ASCII without
markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, SGML or XML using a publicly
available DTD, and standard-conforming simple HTML designed for human
modification. Opaque formats include PostScript, PDF, proprietary formats that
can be read and edited only by proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for
which the DTD and/or processing tools are not generally available, and the
machine-generated HTML produced by some word processors for output purposes
only.

The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself, plus such
following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material this License
requires to appear in the title page. For works in formats which do not have
any title page as such, "Title Page" means the text near the most prominent
appearance of the work's title, preceding the beginning of the body of the
text.

G.2. Verbatim copying
----------------------



You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either commercially or
noncommercially, provided that this License, the copyright notices, and the
license notice saying this License applies to the Document are reproduced in
all copies, and that you add no other conditions whatsoever to those of this
License. You may not use technical measures to obstruct or control the reading
or further copying of the copies you make or distribute. However, you may
accept compensation in exchange for copies. If you distribute a large enough
number of copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.

You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and you may
publicly display copies.

G.3. Copying in quantity
-------------------------



If you publish printed copies of the Document numbering more than 100, and the
Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose the copies in
covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover Texts: Front-Cover
Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on the back cover. Both covers
must also clearly and legibly identify you as the publisher of these copies.
The front cover must present the full title with all words of the title equally
prominent and visible. You may add other material on the covers in addition.
Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve the title
of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated as verbatim
copying in other respects.

If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit legibly, you
should put the first ones listed (as many as fit reasonably) on the actual
cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent pages.

If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering more than
100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent copy along with
each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy a publicly-accessible
computer-network location containing a complete Transparent copy of the
Document, free of added material, which the general network-using public has
access to download anonymously at no charge using public-standard network
protocols. If you use the latter option, you must take reasonably prudent
steps, when you begin distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that
this Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated location until
at least one year after the last time you distribute an Opaque copy (directly
or through your agents or retailers) of that edition to the public.

It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the Document
well before redistributing any large number of copies, to give them a chance to
provide you with an updated version of the Document.

G.4. Modifications
-------------------



You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under the
conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release the Modified
Version under precisely this License, with the Modified Version filling the
role of the Document, thus licensing distribution and modification of the
Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy of it. In addition, you must do
these things in the Modified Version:
   


::

 A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct from that
    of the Document, and from those of previous versions (which should, if
    there were any, be listed in the History section of the Document). You may
    use the same title as a previous version if the original publisher of that
    version gives permission.
 B. List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities
    responsible for authorship of the modifications in the Modified Version,
    together with at least five of the principal authors of the Document (all
    of its principal authors, if it has less than five).
 C. State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the Modified Version,
    as the publisher.
 D. Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.
 E. Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications adjacent to the
    other copyright notices.
 F. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice giving
    the public permission to use the Modified Version under the terms of this
    License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.
 G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections and
    required Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.
 H. Include an unaltered copy of this License.
 I. Preserve the section entitled "History", and its title, and add to it an
    item stating at least the title, year, new authors, and publisher of the
    Modified Version as given on the Title Page. If there is no section
    entitled "History" in the Document, create one stating the title, year,
    authors, and publisher of the Document as given on its Title Page, then add
    an item describing the Modified Version as stated in the previous sentence.
 J. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for public
    access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise the network
    locations given in the Document for previous versions it was based on.
    These may be placed in the "History" section. You may omit a network
    location for a work that was published at least four years before the
    Document itself, or if the original publisher of the version it refers to
    gives permission.
 K. In any section entitled "Acknowledgements" or "Dedications", preserve the
    section's title, and preserve in the section all the substance and tone of
    each of the contributor acknowledgements and/or dedications given therein.
 L. Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered in their text
    and in their titles. Section numbers or the equivalent are not considered
    part of the section titles.
 M. Delete any section entitled "Endorsements". Such a section may not be
    included in the Modified Version.
 N. Do not retitle any existing section as "Endorsements" or to conflict in
    title with any Invariant Section.


If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or appendices that
qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material copied from the Document,
you may at your option designate some or all of these sections as invariant. To
do this, add their titles to the list of Invariant Sections in the Modified
Version's license notice. These titles must be distinct from any other section
titles.

You may add a section entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains nothing but
endorsements of your Modified Version by various parties--for example,
statements of peer review or that the text has been approved by an organization
as the authoritative definition of a standard.

You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a passage
of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list of Cover Texts
in the Modified Version. Only one passage of Front-Cover Text and one of
Back-Cover Text may be added by (or through arrangements made by) any one
entity. If the Document already includes a cover text for the same cover,
previously added by you or by arrangement made by the same entity you are
acting on behalf of, you may not add another; but you may replace the old one,
on explicit permission from the previous publisher that added the old one.

The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License give
permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or imply
endorsement of any Modified Version.

G.5. Combining documents
-------------------------



You may combine the Document with other documents released under this License,
under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified versions, provided that
you include in the combination all of the Invariant Sections of all of the
original documents, unmodified, and list them all as Invariant Sections of your
combined work in its license notice.

The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and multiple
identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single copy. If there are
multiple Invariant Sections with the same name but different contents, make the
title of each such section unique by adding at the end of it, in parentheses,
the name of the original author or publisher of that section if known, or else
a unique number. Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of
Invariant Sections in the license notice of the combined work.

In the combination, you must combine any sections entitled "History" in the
various original documents, forming one section entitled "History"; likewise
combine any sections entitled "Acknowledgements", and any sections entitled
"Dedications". You must delete all sections entitled "Endorsements."

G.6. Collections of documents
------------------------------



You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents
released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this License
in the various documents with a single copy that is included in the collection,
provided that you follow the rules of this License for verbatim copying of each
of the documents in all other respects.

You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute it
individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of this License
into the extracted document, and follow this License in all other respects
regarding verbatim copying of that document.

G.7. Aggregation with independent works
----------------------------------------



A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate and
independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or distribution
medium, does not as a whole count as a Modified Version of the Document,
provided no compilation copyright is claimed for the compilation. Such a
compilation is called an "aggregate", and this License does not apply to the
other self-contained works thus compiled with the Document, on account of their
being thus compiled, if they are not themselves derivative works of the
Document.

If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these copies of the
Document, then if the Document is less than one quarter of the entire
aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed on covers that surround
only the Document within the aggregate. Otherwise they must appear on covers
around the whole aggregate.

G.8. Translation
-----------------



Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may distribute
translations of the Document under the terms of section 4. Replacing Invariant
Sections with translations requires special permission from their copyright
holders, but you may include translations of some or all Invariant Sections in
addition to the original versions of these Invariant Sections. You may include
a translation of this License provided that you also include the original
English version of this License. In case of a disagreement between the
translation and the original English version of this License, the original
English version will prevail.

G.9. Termination
-----------------



You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except as
expressly provided for under this License. Any other attempt to copy, modify,
sublicense or distribute the Document is void, and will automatically terminate
your rights under this License. However, parties who have received copies, or
rights, from you under this License will not have their licenses terminated so
long as such parties remain in full compliance.

G.10. Future revisions of this license
---------------------------------------



The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of the GNU Free
Documentation License from time to time. Such new versions will be similar in
spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to address new problems
or concerns. See http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/ (http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/).

Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number. If the
Document specifies that a particular numbered version of this License "or any
later version" applies to it, you have the option of following the terms and
conditions either of that specified version or of any later version that has
been published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation. If the
Document does not specify a version number of this License, you may choose any
version ever published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation.

G.11. How to use this License for your documents
-------------------------------------------------



To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of the
License in the document and put the following copyright and license notices
just after the title page:
   
   
    Copyright (c) YEAR YOUR NAME. Permission is granted to copy, distribute and
    /or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation
    License, Version 1.1 or any later version published by the Free Software
    Foundation; with the Invariant Sections being LIST THEIR TITLES, with the
    Front-Cover Texts being LIST, and with the Back-Cover Texts being LIST. A
    copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU Free
    Documentation License".


If you have no Invariant Sections, write "with no Invariant Sections" instead
of saying which ones are invariant. If you have no Front-Cover Texts, write "no
Front-Cover Texts" instead of "Front-Cover Texts being LIST"; likewise for
Back-Cover Texts.

If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we recommend
releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of free software
license, such as the GNU General Public License, to permit their use in free
software.

Appendix H. Python license

H.A. History of the software


Python was created in the early 1990s by Guido van Rossum at Stichting
Mathematisch Centrum (CWI) in the Netherlands as a successor of a language
called ABC. Guido is Python's principal author, although it includes many
contributions from others. The last version released from CWI was Python 1.2.
In 1995, Guido continued his work on Python at the Corporation for National
Research Initiatives (CNRI) in Reston, Virginia where he released several
versions of the software. Python 1.6 was the last of the versions released by
CNRI. In 2000, Guido and the Python core development team moved to BeOpen.com
to form the BeOpen PythonLabs team. Python 2.0 was the first and only release
from BeOpen.com.

Following the release of Python 1.6, and after Guido van Rossum left CNRI to
work with commercial software developers, it became clear that the ability to
use Python with software available under the GNU Public License (GPL) was very
desirable. CNRI and the Free Software Foundation (FSF) interacted to develop
enabling wording changes to the Python license. Python 1.6.1 is essentially the
same as Python 1.6, with a few minor bug fixes, and with a different license
that enables later versions to be GPL-compatible. Python 2.1 is a derivative
work of Python 1.6.1, as well as of Python 2.0.

After Python 2.0 was released by BeOpen.com, Guido van Rossum and the other
PythonLabs developers joined Digital Creations. All intellectual property added
from this point on, starting with Python 2.1 and its alpha and beta releases,
is owned by the Python Software Foundation (PSF), a non-profit modeled after
the Apache Software Foundation. See http://www.python.org/psf/ for more
information about the PSF.

Thanks to the many outside volunteers who have worked under Guido's direction
to make these releases possible.

H.B. Terms and conditions for accessing or otherwise using Python

H.B.1. PSF license agreement

 1. This LICENSE AGREEMENT is between the Python Software Foundation ("PSF"),
    and the Individual or Organization ("Licensee") accessing and otherwise
    using Python 2.1.1 software in source or binary form and its associated
    documentation.
 2. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License Agreement, PSF hereby
    grants Licensee a nonexclusive, royalty-free, world-wide license to
    reproduce, analyze, test, perform and/or display publicly, prepare
    derivative works, distribute, and otherwise use Python 2.1.1 alone or in
    any derivative version, provided, however, that PSF's License Agreement and
    PSF's notice of copyright, i.e., "Copyright (c) 2001 Python Software
    Foundation; All Rights Reserved" are retained in Python 2.1.1 alone or in
    any derivative version prepared by Licensee.
 3. In the event Licensee prepares a derivative work that is based on or
    incorporates Python 2.1.1 or any part thereof, and wants to make the
    derivative work available to others as provided herein, then Licensee
    hereby agrees to include in any such work a brief summary of the changes
    made to Python 2.1.1.
 4. PSF is making Python 2.1.1 available to Licensee on an "AS IS" basis. PSF
    MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED. BY WAY OF
    EXAMPLE, BUT NOT LIMITATION, PSF MAKES NO AND DISCLAIMS ANY REPRESENTATION
    OR WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR
    THAT THE USE OF PYTHON 2.1.1 WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY THIRD PARTY RIGHTS.
 5. PSF SHALL NOT BE LIABLE TO LICENSEE OR ANY OTHER USERS OF PYTHON 2.1.1 FOR
    ANY INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR LOSS AS A RESULT OF
    MODIFYING, DISTRIBUTING, OR OTHERWISE USING PYTHON 2.1.1, OR ANY DERIVATIVE
    THEREOF, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY THEREOF.
 6. This License Agreement will automatically terminate upon a material breach
    of its terms and conditions.
 7. Nothing in this License Agreement shall be deemed to create any relationship
    of agency, partnership, or joint venture between PSF and Licensee. This
    License Agreement does not grant permission to use PSF trademarks or trade
    name in a trademark sense to endorse or promote products or services of
    Licensee, or any third party.
 8. By copying, installing or otherwise using Python 2.1.1, Licensee agrees to
    be bound by the terms and conditions of this License Agreement.

H.B.2. BeOpen Python open source license agreement version 1

 1. This LICENSE AGREEMENT is between BeOpen.com ("BeOpen"), having an office at
    160 Saratoga Avenue, Santa Clara, CA 95051, and the Individual or
    Organization ("Licensee") accessing and otherwise using this software in
    source or binary form and its associated documentation ("the Software").
 2. Subject to the terms and conditions of this BeOpen Python License Agreement,
    BeOpen hereby grants Licensee a non-exclusive, royalty-free, world-wide
    license to reproduce, analyze, test, perform and/or display publicly,
    prepare derivative works, distribute, and otherwise use the Software alone
    or in any derivative version, provided, however, that the BeOpen Python
    License is retained in the Software, alone or in any derivative version
    prepared by Licensee.
 3. BeOpen is making the Software available to Licensee on an "AS IS" basis.
    BEOPEN MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED. BY WAY
    OF EXAMPLE, BUT NOT LIMITATION, BEOPEN MAKES NO AND DISCLAIMS ANY
    REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR
    PURPOSE OR THAT THE USE OF THE SOFTWARE WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY THIRD PARTY
    RIGHTS.
 4. BEOPEN SHALL NOT BE LIABLE TO LICENSEE OR ANY OTHER USERS OF THE SOFTWARE
    FOR ANY INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR LOSS AS A RESULT
    OF USING, MODIFYING OR DISTRIBUTING THE SOFTWARE, OR ANY DERIVATIVE
    THEREOF, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY THEREOF.
 5. This License Agreement will automatically terminate upon a material breach
    of its terms and conditions.
 6. This License Agreement shall be governed by and interpreted in all respects
    by the law of the State of California, excluding conflict of law
    provisions. Nothing in this License Agreement shall be deemed to create any
    relationship of agency, partnership, or joint venture between BeOpen and
    Licensee. This License Agreement does not grant permission to use BeOpen
    trademarks or trade names in a trademark sense to endorse or promote
    products or services of Licensee, or any third party. As an exception, the
    "BeOpen Python" logos available at http://www.pythonlabs.com/logos.html may
    be used according to the permissions granted on that web page.
 7. By copying, installing or otherwise using the software, Licensee agrees to
    be bound by the terms and conditions of this License Agreement.

H.B.3. CNRI open source GPL-compatible license agreement

 1. This LICENSE AGREEMENT is between the Corporation for National Research
    Initiatives, having an office at 1895 Preston White Drive, Reston, VA 20191
    ("CNRI"), and the Individual or Organization ("Licensee") accessing and
    otherwise using Python 1.6.1 software in source or binary form and its
    associated documentation.
 2. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License Agreement, CNRI hereby
    grants Licensee a nonexclusive, royalty-free, world-wide license to
    reproduce, analyze, test, perform and/or display publicly, prepare
    derivative works, distribute, and otherwise use Python 1.6.1 alone or in
    any derivative version, provided, however, that CNRI's License Agreement
    and CNRI's notice of copyright, i.e., "Copyright (c) 1995-2001 Corporation
    for National Research Initiatives; All Rights Reserved" are retained in
    Python 1.6.1 alone or in any derivative version prepared by Licensee.
    Alternately, in lieu of CNRI's License Agreement, Licensee may substitute
    the following text (omitting the quotes): "Python 1.6.1 is made available
    subject to the terms and conditions in CNRI's License Agreement. This
    Agreement together with Python 1.6.1 may be located on the Internet using
    the following unique, persistent identifier (known as a handle): 1895.22/
    1013. This Agreement may also be obtained from a proxy server on the
    Internet using the following URL: http://hdl.handle.net/1895.22/1013".
 3. In the event Licensee prepares a derivative work that is based on or
    incorporates Python 1.6.1 or any part thereof, and wants to make the
    derivative work available to others as provided herein, then Licensee
    hereby agrees to include in any such work a brief summary of the changes
    made to Python 1.6.1.
 4. CNRI is making Python 1.6.1 available to Licensee on an "AS IS" basis. CNRI
    MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED. BY WAY OF
    EXAMPLE, BUT NOT LIMITATION, CNRI MAKES NO AND DISCLAIMS ANY REPRESENTATION
    OR WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR
    THAT THE USE OF PYTHON 1.6.1 WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY THIRD PARTY RIGHTS.
 5. CNRI SHALL NOT BE LIABLE TO LICENSEE OR ANY OTHER USERS OF PYTHON 1.6.1 FOR
    ANY INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR LOSS AS A RESULT OF
    MODIFYING, DISTRIBUTING, OR OTHERWISE USING PYTHON 1.6.1, OR ANY DERIVATIVE
    THEREOF, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY THEREOF.
 6. This License Agreement will automatically terminate upon a material breach
    of its terms and conditions.
 7. This License Agreement shall be governed by the federal intellectual
    property law of the United States, including without limitation the federal
    copyright law, and, to the extent such U.S. federal law does not apply, by
    the law of the Commonwealth of Virginia, excluding Virginia's conflict of
    law provisions. Notwithstanding the foregoing, with regard to derivative
    works based on Python 1.6.1 that incorporate non-separable material that
    was previously distributed under the GNU General Public License (GPL), the
    law of the Commonwealth of Virginia shall govern this License Agreement
    only as to issues arising under or with respect to Paragraphs 4, 5, and 7
    of this License Agreement. Nothing in this License Agreement shall be
    deemed to create any relationship of agency, partnership, or joint venture
    between CNRI and Licensee. This License Agreement does not grant permission
    to use CNRI trademarks or trade name in a trademark sense to endorse or
    promote products or services of Licensee, or any third party.
 8. By clicking on the "ACCEPT" button where indicated, or by copying,
    installing or otherwise using Python 1.6.1, Licensee agrees to be bound by
    the terms and conditions of this License Agreement.

H.B.4. CWI permissions statement and disclaimer

   
    Copyright (c) 1991 - 1995, Stichting Mathematisch Centrum Amsterdam, The
    Netherlands. All rights reserved.


Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its
documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided that
the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both that copyright
notice and this permission notice appear in supporting documentation, and that
the name of Stichting Mathematisch Centrum or CWI not be used in advertising or
publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without specific, written
prior permission.

STICHTING MATHEMATISCH CENTRUM DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS
SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS, IN
NO EVENT SHALL STICHTING MATHEMATISCH CENTRUM BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL,
INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS
OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER
TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF
THIS SOFTWARE.
